Long-Term Impact of Digital Media on Brain Development in Children
Authors: Samson Nivins PhD1*, Bruno Sauce PhD2, Magnus Liebherr PhD3, Nicholas Judd PhD1, Torkel Klingberg PhD1*

Abstract

Digital media (DM) takes an increasingly large part of children’s time, yet the long-term effect on brain development remains unclear. We investigated how individual effects of DM use (i.e., using social media, playing video games, or watching television/videos) on the development of the cortex (i.e., global cortical surface area), striatum, and cerebellum in children over four years, accounting for both socioeconomic status and genetic predisposition. We used a prospective, multicentre, longitudinal cohort of children from the Adolescent Brain and Cognitive Development Study, aged 9.9 years when entering the study, and who were followed for four years. Annually, children reported their DM usage through the Youth Screen Time Survey and underwent brain magnetic resonance imaging scans every two years. Quadratic-mixed effect modelling was used to investigate the relationship between individual DM usage and brain development. We found that individual DM usage did not alter the development of cortex or striatum volumes. However, high social media usage was associated with a statistically significant change in the developmental trajectory of cerebellum volumes, and the accumulated effect of high-vs-low social media users on cerebellum volumes over four years was only β= -0.03, which was considered insignificant. Nevertheless, the developmental trend for heavy social media users was accelerated at later time points. This calls for further studies and longer follow-ups on the impact of social media on brain development.

This repository includes all code to replicate results, figures and tables in the manuscript. 
We could not release the data as you need to request access from NDA to get data from ABCD. However, we have kept the orginal file names in the data directory.
We computed PGS inhouse.
